Added detailed description about extension types (#186)
eclipse-theia/theia-website: src/docs/extensions.md

title: Extensions
---

> # Extensions and plugins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Extensions and Plugins
```

Eclipse Theia is designed in a very modular and extensible way. It supports three ways of being extended/adapted to your specific requirements. These are complementary and are targeted at different use cases. You can pick the best option and even mix them within the same project.

> In the following, we will give you a quick overview of the available extension mechanisms and provide more details in the sections below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following documentation, we will give you a quick overview of the available extension mechanisms and provide more details in the sections below.
```

> - **VS Code extensions**: Simple to write, installable at runtime, compatible with VS Code, limited to the VS Code extension API, some use cases not possible due to API restrictions => Used for adding features to existing tools. Note that you can also use existing VS Code extensions within Theia, too.

Reviewer: Perhaps bullet points would be clearer than a run-on sentence with pros and cons mixed together?

Author: Had that before, looks pretty weird. I would prefer to keep it as is.

> - **Theia extensions**: Install at compile time, full access to internals of Theia via dependency injection, almost no limitations in terms of accessible API => used to build custom products and for features not covered by the VS Code extension API. Note that the Theia project (including the core) is fully built using Theia extensions in a modular way.

Reviewer: We should promote `@theia` extensions first I believe. Moreover, it is the first subsection listed afterwards so we should align.

Author: I thought about this very carefully and went back and fourth. I agree hat it should be consistent in both sections for sure, so I turned the lower section around now to put VS Code extensions first.
The main two reasons for this order are:
1. Most people will be satisfied with a VS Code extension, so it is the most common case. We should let people know that they can do this.
2. Theia extensions are kind of VS Code extension ++, so with the current flow it is like "VS Code extension" is default, if you need more then there is an even more powerful way.
I do not have a hard opinion on this, but I like this order better

Reviewer: I still think we should aim to document `theia` extensions first given we are describing the `eclipse theia` framework and it is the main extension mechanism. We can reference `vscode` extensions which are supported through the plugin-system. It would be odd to me to come across documentation for the framework only to see that vscode extensions come before actual theia extensions which have much more flexibility, and possibilities.

Author: I guess we need a third opinion then. @tsmaeder : This is about the order in which the extension overview explains the extension mechanisms. You can look at this preview: https://deploy-preview-186--romantic-mcclintock-8d974f.netlify.app/
Click on documentation and then "extensions and plugins".
Two positions are described in the two comments above

Reviewer 2: I think you're focusing on the wrong distinction here: Theia plugins run remotely and are added at run time.  VS Code extensions are a kind of Theia plugin that uses the VS Code API namespace. These two should be described together, maybe even in the same paragraph. 
Theia extensions on the other hand are compile-time extensions and way more configurable. That is the distinction readers must come away with.

As for the description order: I think we want folks to default to implementing plugins, not extensions: the API is more stable and the build process is simpler. Unless you have a reason to do an extensions, adopters should use plugins. I would put that one first.

In the long run, I would like to get rid of the "default API" in any case: there would be a mechanism to add API namespaces in the plugin module and "plugin-theia-ext" and "plugin-vscode-ext" would declare (PoC: https://github.com/eclipse-theia/theia/pull/8180). That way VS Code is "just another API". Theia plugin API would only cover what is not already in the VSCode API.

Author: About your first paragraph: TBH, I think this distinction between Theia extensions and VS Code extensions is actually made, at least I indended to.
"Simple to write, installable at runtime"
"Install at compile time, full access to internals of Theia"

About Theia plugins vs. VS Code extensions:
I agree, VS Code extensions are a special type of Theia plugins, it says: "Like VS Code extensions, additional access to some Theia specific APIs and the Frontend (frontend plugins)". This article is meant as a beginner page. People very likely know about VS Code extensions, but not about Theia plugins and Theia extensions. So I want to catch them from where they are. "Hey, you can just use VS Code extensions, but we even have more". If somebody who is completely new to Theia starts with a VS Code extension, I think it is most likely that they have a good first development experience. If they need more, they can discover Theia plugins and Theia extensions. 

I think you use Theia plugins in Che a lot, but I have not seen them often somewhere else, yet.  I think Theia plugins have a lot of potential, but as you wrote rather mid term. I am not sure whether we should people default to them, yet. I believe we are missing quite some documentation there. This article is not set in stone, we can change the order in the future. WDYT?

Author: We might also put this on the agenda of the dev meeting, because this is more a strategic question rather then just ordering paragraphs

Author: As discussed in todays dev meeting, order should be fine as is.

- **Theia plugins**: Like VS Code extensions, additional access to some Theia specific APIs and the Frontend (frontend plugins), Theia specific parts are not compatible with VS Code.

> The following diagram shows the high level architecture for all three options. VS Code extensions and Theia plugins run in a dedicated process, can be installed at runtime and work against a defined API. Theia extensions are added during compile time and become a first class citizen within your Theia application. They can access the full API of Theia.

Reviewer: Not sure about the "first class citizen" mention, it probably does not translate well or is immediately understandable by others.

Author: removed

<img src="/extensiontypes.png" alt="Theia Logo Blue" style="max-width: 525px">

> If you would like more guidance on which mechanism to use, please also refer to [this detailed comparions between VS Code extensions and Theia extensions](https://eclipsesource.com/blogs/2021/03/24/vs-code-extensions-vs-theia-extensions/).

Reviewer: Typo:

```suggestion
If you would like more guidance on which mechanism to use, please also refer to [this detailed comparison between VS Code extensions and Theia extensions](https://eclipsesource.com/blogs/2021/03/24/vs-code-extensions-vs-theia-extensions/).
```

> ##Theia extensions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Theia Extensions
```

> A Theia extension is a module that resides inside a Theia application and communicates with other modules (Theia extensions) via dependency injection. The Theia project itself is composed of Theia extensions too. To create a Theia application, you can select a number of Theia extensions provided by the Theia project, add your own custom Theia extensions and then compile and run the result. Your custom Theia extension will have the same level of access as the core ones. This modularity allows you to extend, adapt or remove almost anything in Theia according to your requirements. Also specific use cases, such as complex views are easier to develop with Theia extensions compared to VS Code extensions.

Reviewer: > A Theia extension is a module that resides inside a Theia application and communicates with other modules (Theia extensions) via dependency injection.

Note sure I follow what you mean by "communicates via dependency injection".

Author: I just removed this, it is not important here

> A Theia extension is a module that resides inside a Theia application and communicates with other modules (Theia extensions) via dependency injection. The Theia project itself is composed of Theia extensions too. To create a Theia application, you can select a number of Theia extensions provided by the Theia project, add your own custom Theia extensions and then compile and run the result. Your custom Theia extension will have the same level of access as the core ones. This modularity allows you to extend, adapt or remove almost anything in Theia according to your requirements. Also specific use cases, such as complex views are easier to develop with Theia extensions compared to VS Code extensions.

Reviewer: > Your custom Theia extension will have the same level of access as the core ones.

I'm not sure this is immediately understandable by newcomers.
- what types of access
- what are core extensions

Author: clarified

Technically, an extension is an npm package that exposes any number of DI modules (`ContainerModule`) that contribute to the creation of the DI container.

> An extension is consumed by adding a dependency to the npm-package in the `package.json` of the application. Extensions are meant to be installed at compile time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extensions are consumed by declaring them as a `dependency` in the `package.json` of the application/extension, and are installed at compile time.
```

See [this section](https://theia-ide.org/docs/authoring_extensions/) for more detail on how to author a Theia extension.

> ##VS Code extensions

Reviewer: Please include a newline as well:

```suggestion

## VS Code Extensions
```

> VS Code extensions are the popular mechanism to extend VS Code with new language support and other features. VS Code extensions are simple to develop, they have access to a defined and restricted API and VS Code extensions can be installed at runtime. Eclipse Theia provides the same extension API as VS Code, so extensions are compatible. Therefore, to develop your own extension, please refer to the [VS Code extension documentation](https://code.visualstudio.com/api). Please also refer to this coverage report, highlighting which API of VS Code is covered by Theia.

Reviewer: There is no mention of bundled or builtin vscode extensions which can be included by default in an extension, and not at runtime.

Author: added

> Please also note that you can use existing VS Code extensions in Theia, too. A good source for installing or downloading extensions is the [Open VSX registry](https://open-vsx.org/).

Reviewer: > Please also note that you can use existing VS Code extensions in Theia, too.

Not sure this needs to be mentioned when we have an entire section stating that vscode extensions can be re-used in theia?

Author: Yes, this needs to be mentioned! :-)

> ##Theia plugins

Reviewer: Please include a newline as well:

```suggestion

## Theia Plugins
```

Reviewer 3: +1 to suggested capitalization of headings. I usually adhere to these rules:
https://www.webucator.com/article/how-to-capitalize-headings-and-titles/

title: Extensions
---

# Extensions and Plugins

Eclipse Theia is designed in a very modular and extensible way. It supports three ways of being extended/adapted to your specific requirements. These are complementary and are targeted at different use cases. You can pick the best option and even mix them within the same project.
In the following, we will give you a quick overview of the available extension mechanisms and provide more details in the sections below.

- **VS Code extensions**: Simple to write, installable at runtime, compatible with VS Code, limited to the VS Code extension API, some use cases not possible due to API restrictions => Used for adding features to existing tools. Note that you can also use existing VS Code extensions within Theia, too.
- **Theia extensions**: Install at compile time, full access to internals of Theia via dependency injection, almost no limitations in terms of accessible API => used to build custom products and for features not covered by the VS Code extension API. Note that the Theia project (including the core) is fully built using Theia extensions in a modular way.

> - **Theia plugins**: Like VS Code extensions, additional access to some Theia specific APIs and the Frontend (frontend plugins), Theia specific parts are not compatible with VS Code.

Reviewer: nit: `newline` after the bullet point:

```suggestion
- **Theia plugins**: Like VS Code extensions, additional access to some Theia specific APIs and the Frontend (frontend plugins), Theia specific parts are not compatible with VS Code.

```

It is confusing when looking at the rendering of the site itself, I believe this should be a separate paragraph describing the image:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/40359487/129025559-99392a62-7495-4222-b084-ff35c8cb1a7c.png)

<img src="/extensiontypes.png" alt="Theia Logo Blue" style="max-width: 525px">

If you would like more guidance on which mechanism to use, please also refer to [this detailed comparison between VS Code extensions and Theia extensions](https://eclipsesource.com/blogs/2021/03/24/vs-code-extensions-vs-theia-extensions/).

##VS Code Extensions
VS Code extensions are the popular mechanism to extend VS Code with new language support and other features. VS Code extensions are simple to develop and they have access to a defined and restricted API. VS Code extensions can be pre-installed (built in), but also installed at runtime (e.g. by the user). Eclipse Theia provides the same extension API as VS Code, so extensions are compatible. Therefore, to develop your own extension, please refer to the [VS Code extension documentation](https://code.visualstudio.com/api). Please also refer to this coverage report, highlighting which API of VS Code is covered by Theia.
Please also note that you can use existing VS Code extensions in Theia, too. A good source for installing or downloading extensions is the [Open VSX registry](https://open-vsx.org/).

##Theia Extensions

> A Theia extension is a module that resides inside a Theia application and directly ommunicates with other modules (Theia extensions). The Theia project itself is composed of Theia extensions too. To create a Theia application, you can select a number of Theia extensions provided by the Theia project (core extensions), add your own custom Theia extensions and then compile and run the result. Your custom Theia extension will have access to the same API as the core extensions. This modularity allows you to extend, adapt or remove almost anything in Theia according to your requirements. Also specific use cases, such as complex views are easier to develop with Theia extensions compared to VS Code extensions.

Reviewer: typo:

```suggestion
A Theia extension is a module that resides inside a Theia application and directly communicates with other modules (Theia extensions). The Theia project itself is composed of Theia extensions too. To create a Theia application, you can select a number of Theia extensions provided by the Theia project (core extensions), add your own custom Theia extensions and then compile and run the result. Your custom Theia extension will have access to the same API as the core extensions. This modularity allows you to extend, adapt or remove almost anything in Theia according to your requirements. Also specific use cases, such as complex views are easier to develop with Theia extensions compared to VS Code extensions.
```

> A Theia extension is a module that resides inside a Theia application and directly ommunicates with other modules (Theia extensions). The Theia project itself is composed of Theia extensions too. To create a Theia application, you can select a number of Theia extensions provided by the Theia project (core extensions), add your own custom Theia extensions and then compile and run the result. Your custom Theia extension will have access to the same API as the core extensions. This modularity allows you to extend, adapt or remove almost anything in Theia according to your requirements. Also specific use cases, such as complex views are easier to develop with Theia extensions compared to VS Code extensions.

Author: done

Technically, an extension is an npm package that exposes any number of DI modules (`ContainerModule`) that contribute to the creation of the DI container.
Extensions are consumed by declaring them as a `dependency` in the `package.json` of the application/extension, and are installed at compile time.
See [this section](https://theia-ide.org/docs/authoring_extensions/) for more detail on how to author a Theia extension.

> ##Theia Plugins
> Theia plugins are a special type of VS Code extensions that only run in Eclipse Theia. They share the architecture and other attributes of VS Code extensions, but they also have access to additional API that is only available in Theia, not in VS Code. Most noticeable, Theia plugins can also directly contribute to the frontend while VS Code extensions are restricted to the backend. As a consequence Theia plugins can directly manipulate the UI without going through a webview abstraction, easing the development process. Please see [this section](https://theia-ide.org/docs/authoring_plugins/) for more details about Theia plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Theia Plugins

Theia plugins are a special type of VS Code extensions that only run in Eclipse Theia. They share the architecture and other attributes of VS Code extensions, but they also have access to additional API that is only available in Theia, not in VS Code. Most noticeable, Theia plugins can also directly contribute to the frontend while VS Code extensions are restricted to the backend. As a consequence Theia plugins can directly manipulate the UI without going through a webview abstraction, easing the development process. Please see [this section](https://theia-ide.org/docs/authoring_plugins/) for more details about Theia plugins.
```
